# Software Engineering: Advanced Architectures and Techniques - INF0100

This teaching contributes to the educational objectives of the software
development area of the Master's Degree in Computer Science. The course aims to
provide students with an overview of mission critical systems development
technologies with particular emphasis on industrial solutions for e-Business,
including hints of Cloud Computing. Provide students with Project Management
methodologies and tools to allow them to manage the development of Software
projects from analysis to testing. The basics of Project Management combined
with the application of the Agile Software Engineering methodology will be
applied to the development of the project carried out in the laboratory. The
teaching allows students to familiarize themselves with terminologies commonly
used in modern industry such as: component development, multilevel
architectures, middleware.
For the laboratory part, a complete application is created based on: UML model,
three-tier architecture, component model and Microservices with Spring in Java
and Android applications. Particular attention to integration with Cloud
environments and social networks, as an example of integration of heterogeneous
services. Furthermore, the Dev ops and Continuos Integration methodologies will
be applied, using GIT, Maven and Microservices architectures, with Docker and
Kubernetes. The themes introduced during the laboratory project complement and
integrate the knowledge deriving from the theoretical part (knowledge and
understanding), at the same time presenting realistic problems of construction
of a complex application, also investigating alternative solutions (applying
knowledge and understanding). The preparation, the intermediate presentations
and the discussion of the project are aimed at stimulating the ability to
organize work in small groups (2-3 students), and then to verbally illustrate
the solutions adopted (communication skills).

---

* [Course Sheet](https://magistrale.informatica.unito.it/do/storicocorsi.pl/Show?_id=9vyk_2223)
