# Machine Learning - AAut-INF0091

This course will teach the differences between tasks and models and will
introduce the students to some of the popular models in Machine Learning. The
program of the course will consist in the introductory part followed by a
selection of the topics taken from the following list that will be agreed with
the teachers on a single-student basis, according to the student's interests.
The classification (into two classes and the transformation of a binary
classification model into a multiple class model), concept learning by means of
logical formulas, tree models and their purposes, hints to rule models and
subgroup discovery, linear models (least squares, regression), perceptron,
Support Vector Machines, Kernel methods. It will discuss the concept of
bias-variance decomposition and the problem of overfitting. It will present the
models based on distance, such as k-nearest neighbors, k-means clustering,
hierarchical clustering, and density based clustering. The last part of the
course discusses the probabilistic models (Naive Bayes, logistic regression and
Expectation Maximization clustering), the evaluation of the models and of the
statistical significance tests on the results. The laboratory part of the course
will introduce the students to a practical open software suite ([Scikit
Learn](http://scikit-learn.org/stable/) in Python) that includes the algorithms
of learning of the models seen during the course (and much more). With Scikit
Learn we will approach some sessions of data analysis using some public
available datasets.

---

* [Course Sheet](https://magistrale.informatica.unito.it/do/corsi.pl/Show?_id=f45c)
